[SWOOSH]
[SOFT CHIMES]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
What mysteries
are to be revealed
within the deepest parts of
our brain and body system?
An exciting new frontier in
both science and medicine
is investigating how both
the gut and the heart
operate as two
independent brain centers.
Not only that, but
the more we learn,
the more we realize
that the brain
in the gut and the
brain in the heart
are more primary than
the brain in the head.
Our concept of the brain is thus
expanding into a more holistic
framework as
science is beginning
to recognize that there are
three brains in our body.
How does this brain
within the gut
fit in with our exploration
of consciousness?
To answer that, let's
begin by taking a look
at the intelligence of the gut.
The gut has its own
independent brain system known
as the enteric nervous system.
This system is composed
of 100 million nerve cells
lining the
gastrointestinal tract.
That's more nerve cells
than the spinal column
and peripheral nervous system.
Talk about a
mind-blowing discovery.
This system is
responsible for managing
our digestive processes,
and it sends signals
to the brain to alert us when
there's any sort of imbalance.
Scientists are finding this
communication is directly
connected to the limbic
system and discoveries
are leading to new
breakthroughs in how
we think of the gut and
the brain relationship.
When we feel
anxious or stressed,
we have abdominal pain or
butterflies in the stomach.
Or if the digestive
system isn't doing well,
we can feel moody or depressed.
It was once thought that anxiety
and depression caused issues
within the digestive system.
But now, research is finding
it's more often the other way
around.
How is this
communication happening?
Well, this brings us
back to the vagus nerve.
Not only does the vagus
nerve play a critical role
in communication between
the heart and the brain,
but it's also a key player
in the brain and the gut's
connection.
And this nerve runs from
the top of the spinal cord
to all major organs in our body.
It's the main component of our
parasympathetic nervous system
that controls our
ability to relax.
Stimulating the vagus
nerve fibers within the gut
influences the brain stem
and the limbic system.
Fascinating new research
shows that toning these fibers
reduces mood and
anxiety disorders,
like depression and PTSD.
So how do we do it?
How do we tone these fibers?
One simple method is using deep
and slow breathing techniques,
like we use in meditation,
especially when we
slow our breathing rate
down to a rate of five
to seven breaths per minute.
We can achieve this by
breathing in to a count of five,
hold the breath for
a count of five,
and then exhale
to a count of 10.
So what is the gut
communicating to the brain?
Well, for one thing, it's
clear that it's about
a lot more than digestion.
The state of our gut impacts
our motivation, our higher
cognitive functions, memory,
intuitive decision-making,
and more.
There's a reason we talk
about having a gut feeling.
This information traveling
from the gut up to the brain
influences our
thoughts and emotions.
So science in the
West is just starting
to recognize how
the state of the gut
affects our overall well-being.
But for many ancient
wisdom traditions,
this isn't new information.
In traditional Chinese
medicine, each organ
is associated with an emotion.
Stimulating the meridian
system strengthens that organ
and restores balance.
The lungs and the
large intestine
correspond with things
like grief and depression.
While the heart and the small
intestine correspond with joy.
If we have an imbalance
in one of these organs,
we may be lacking in joy,
for example, or holding
onto grief or sadness.
And our emotions, they
can be stored in our body
and affect the
function of our organs.
If the gut isn't working
properly, there will be issues.
And this can affect
our emotions, memory,
overall cognitive functions,
and our health as a whole.
For a long time, we
thought of the brain
as the mainframe that
sends the signals
to the rest of the body.
But now, we're seeing
that the deeper
roots of this system,
the gut and the heart,
are driving our brain
and daily consciousness.
Through this season
of Mystery Teachings,
we've been exploring how to
waken our greater potential
and access transcendent
states of consciousness.
To do so, we must build
bridges deeper and deeper
into our brain-body system
so that we can intentionally
influence it.
Our next step on this
journey is to create
a state of homeostasis
within the gut
and harness the full power
of this third brain center.
So what happens when the gut is
functioning at optimal levels?
Well, to answer this, let's
look at the bigger picture.
In many ancient traditions,
the more holistic perspective
is that it's one of
three primary energy
centers within the body.
Within Eastern qigong
and Daoist traditions,
these areas are known as
the upper, the middle,
and the lower
tanden, or dantian.
Now these are located at
the third eye, the heart,
and the hara, just
below the navel.
Is it any wonder that
these three locations
correspond with the brain,
the heart, and the guts?
These three energy
centers function
as storage areas for our
life force known as qi.
But each system
works differently
and with a different
quality of qi.
Now according to the Western
mystery school traditions,
these three energy
centers relate
to different levels of will.
The upper tanden,
or third eye, is
said to be our connection
to the will of our spirit.
It's our connection
to our eternal being--
the love, will, and vision
of our individuated spirit,
our original self.
The middle tanden,
or heart center,
is our connection to
the will of our soul.
It's our connection to the
love of our higher self,
and it's more personal to us.
There's a difference between
the soul and the spirit.
Now we can think of the
spirit as that big picture
perspective of who we are as
an infinite eternal being.
While our soul is more
personal and directly connected
to our purpose and our
contracts in this life.
The lower tanden, or
hara, located at the gut
is more of our
personal body's will.
This is our desires coming up
from the subconscious mind.
It includes the body's urges for
food, sex, life force, power,
and pleasure.
And it's our primary storage
energy center for our vitality.
So how does this relate
to consciousness?
To get a sense of
that, let's use
an analogy of a tree as
our neurological system.
The cortex is like the
upper leaves and branches.
The limbic system is
the lower branches.
While the brain stem is
like the trunk of the tree.
As we then go deeper from the
brainstem down to the heart
and, finally, to the gut, we're
coming into the deepest roots.
At the hara, we are at
the ends of the roots.
And this is where we
draw nourishment up
from the earth into our system
up through the root chakra.
The hara is then the
storage point, or reservoir,
of our body.
While the root chakra's how
we send that energy out to
manifest as well as draw
it up from the Earth.
As we go deeper
into this system,
our consciousness deepens.
The deeper we go, the more we
lose our sense of personality,
our masks dissolve, and we start
tapping into our core self.
Then as we go even
deeper, we begin
to finally dissolve that sense
of self as an individuated
being.
We begin to merge
with the collective
and, from the
collective, we go deeper
and merge with the oneness.
This is the final bridge--
the expansion of consciousness
into oneness with all things.
We're moving beyond
our individuated self
and into unity consciousness.
So how do we come into
this oneness experience?
To really experience that
oneness with the all,
we first have to go
through the void.
The void is what
mystics describe
as a state of
emptiness, nothingness,
no thing manifested yet
all potential exists.
From the perspective
of quantum physics,
we can relate the void
to the zero-point field.
This quantum view
can help us better
understand how to
connect with the void
to reach the state of oneness.
But first, we must
find the gateway,
or what is known in the quantum
physics realm as the gap.
We explored the gap
extensively in Season 1
of Mystery Teachings.
Shifting into quantum
awareness becomes possible
when we focus on the gap.
The time between events,
the space between particles,
the silence between
thoughts or sounds
is the emptiness
between expressions.
Rather than focusing on
the expressions themselves,
focus on the gap.
The quantum gap is more
fundamental than the particles
or events themselves.
The gap is like the blank
canvas or empty space
upon which all objects
are painted or observed.
And this empty space
is the key to accessing
universal consciousness and
the true nature of our reality.
And this exists within you.
And this is the
final bridge, what
I call the expansion bridge.
It's the quantum access point.
And with this
expansion bridge, we
step from the I
am into the void.
We come into I am nothing.
I am empty of all things, and I
surrender to that nothingness.
Then as we pass
through the gate,
it takes us from I am
nothing into the quantum
sea of infinite possibilities.
We become one with
all that is, and we
move into I am all things.
I am the limitless light.
Now how do we transition through
the gap to come into oneness?
Throughout this journey
of consciousness,
we've been stimulating
the central nervous system
in different ways.
But this final step of
the expansion bridge
is about taking
away the stimulation
and coming into stillness,
silence, and emptiness.
We surrender to that stillness.
This contrast sets us free
from the bounds of the body,
allowing us to expand
into the universe.
It's a surrendering, but it
takes a lot of discipline
to come to that stillness.
We surrender in order to
pass through the gateway
of the zero.
We come to nothingness.
Our sense of time
and space disappear.
We enter into the gap between
the moments of expression.
Our journey through these
three major energy centers
of the upper, middle,
and lower tanden
prepares us for this final step.
We bring our conscious
awareness from the mind
into the deepest
parts of our body,
connecting to that deep
stillness at the hara.
Once we connect at
the hara, we weave
this energy back
up to the heart,
then again to the third eye.
And this closes the loop like
the symbol of the ouroboros,
or the serpent
biting its own tail.
In doing this, we are
weaving the energy
and activating this whole
circuit of the three
major energy centers.
From a Kabbalistic perspective,
these three energy centers
correspond with Yesod, Tif'eret,
and Keter on the middle pillar
of the Tree of Life.
So we're activating the
middle pillar in this process.
We're opening up the way to
the supernal realm, where
we may experience
unity consciousness,
and then back down to flow this
light into our mind and body.
This is a state of being
that is fully in tune
and aligned with source.
But in order to
reach that unity,
we must surrender our
attachment to self-identity.
The biggest attachment
we tend to have
is often to our own identity.
We fear losing ourself
if we were to fully
let go and enter into the void.
But this surrender is key to
finding our one true self that
is far more vast than the
personal self-image we hold.
We move beyond
the personal self,
moving from I am
something to I am nothing.
And once we surrender, we
then have the opportunity
to experience the
unlimited potentials
of the zero-point field.
We surrender so that we may come
into oneness with all things.
Now the biggest
challenges we face here
are often our fear of the
unknown, our resistance
to letting go of control, and
our discomfort with silence.
If we want to
access the void, it
is key that we bring our
mind and body to stillness.
We eliminate stimulation
and quiet our inner self
by relaxing more deeply.
The void is a non-visual,
non-auditory experience.
It's a simultaneous sense
of oneness, allness,
and emptiness.
The moment we think any thought
or are stimulated in some way,
we're drawn out of it.
Often, we might not even
realize we were in the void
until we shift back out.
Connecting with the void
requires a letting go
of control and expectation.
We cannot control this process.
We can only open
up and allow it.
It's a surrendering of the mind
and the self into the unknown
of the void, into nothingness.
But the experience of expanding
and surrendering to the void,
it's not a one time
experience after which
we're forever more enlightened.
Rather, the void is always
here, right here, right now,
right in front of you.
And when we establish
the pathways,
we can cross this bridge
as often as we like.
We can access the gaps
between the moments and tune
into the zero-point
field of quantum reality.
Now what do we do if
we tap into the void,
but we can't seem to hold it
for more than a few seconds?
Not to worry.
Even a brief time in
the void connects us
with vast potential energy
and flows this energy
into our personal consciousness.
And any time you find yourself
slipping out of it, just
connect to your hara
and your breath.
The hara is an access
point to the void.
If the mind gets distracted, the
energy doesn't flow properly.
So to reconnect, we bring
our attention to the hara.
We focus on our breath,
breathing in and out
through the lower tanden.
And this brings us
back into the void.
Once we connect with the
void, we must surrender.
Let go of our mind.
Let go of our thoughts.
Surrender to the stillness.
As we do, we allow
ourselves to pass
through this gateway
that then connects
to the limitless light.
Now what does this
all mean for us?
What's the big picture here?
When we connect to the
void, the quantum field
of all possibilities
becomes available to us
so that we can observe it.
When we hold this state,
miracles are possible.
We access our full potential
to create miracles to manifest
and to defy logic.
Ultimately, we are raising
up to our individuated self,
the true self, transcending
ego rather than denying it.
It's a process of alchemy
to transmute and transform
into a more pure state.
And this is the
process of ascension.
And in this process,
there is sacrifice.
We are offering our attachments,
our ego, our personality
onto the altar of sacrifice.
But in truth, we're sacrificing
the lesser for the greater.
It's an act of
surrender and devotion.
We're letting go
of the distortions
so the true self
can shine through.
And we are becoming the true
magician, or the Adam Kadmon.
In the tarot, this archetype
is represented by the magician.
And the magician stands
as the middle pillar,
with one hand reaching
up to source and one hand
reaching down to the physical.
He is the conduit in perfect
alignment with divine will.
And there is a level of
purity, and he is actively
stepping into that
role to be the conduit.
He's engaging his
will to align so
that the pure
energies from source
can flow through
without distortion.
This is not a
reactive posture but
actively stepping into
alignment to be in the flow.
The magician directs the powers
of heaven and the universe
into the physical,
into the four elements,
according to an
intention that is set.
And to achieve this
purity, the negative ego
must be surrendered so that
it doesn't distort the energy
coming through to manifest.
At this level, we can
accomplish and perform magic.
We can make things happen,
while not getting too caught
up or attached to the process.
We maintain our state of
balance on the middle pillar.
The only way to
stay in tune with it
is to continue, starting
each day with connection
to stillness.
We connect with
the source first.
And then we flow
that through our day.
And as we step into action,
we become the conduit
to allow that source energy to
flow through us in alignment
with higher will.
It's very active.
And it's a choice we make.
Now to connect with
that state of stillness,
start by sitting or
standing upright.
Then focus on your breath.
Inhale through the nose.
Exhale through the mouth.
Pull the breath all the
way down to the hara,
just below your navel.
Continue to focus on this point
as you breathe in and out.
Now slow your breathing down
using the following technique.
Breathe in to a count of
five in through the nose.
Hold your breath here in the
hara for a count of five,
holding it down here.
Then breathe out
to a count of 10,
breathing out through the mouth.
Continue this
breathing technique
until you feel yourself
dropping into a deeper
state of stillness.
You can even extend the time of
the pause between the inbreath
and the outbreath.
Focus on the gap, the
stillness between the breaths.
As you feel your sense
of self dissolving
and your mind becomes
like a quiet pond,
you can gently
then drop your head
down a little bit into the space
just in front of your face.
But don't try to do that
until you really feel
that sense of self dissolving.
So until then continue to focus
on this breathing technique.
Then once you do
drop your head down,
hold this position while
allowing your breath
to now become more still.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Surrender to the void.
Just be in the stillness.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In Kabbalah, we have
a morning affirmation
that we use every day.
I come out of the
darkness into the light.
I come with nothing.
I know nothing.
I am empty of all things.
And then we tap
into that emptiness.
And only when we can be
empty and be the no thing,
can we then pass through the
gate into the all things.
And then, therefore, I am
ready to receive all things.
And we tap into the limitless
light that flows directly
from source to us.
Ultimately, this journey is
about becoming the Adam Kadmon,
the perfected human, and
reaching our full potential
as multidimensional beings.
This is who we truly are.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for
exploring the mysteries
of our human potential with
me in this episode of "Mystery
Teachings."
[MUSIC PLAYING]